---
layout: post
title: Asking Stupid Questions
date: 2018-05-21 00:00:00
disqus: y
---

After graduating from Medical School, I started working at a startup
as a software engineer. While I did learn a lot of things in this
time, one thing which sticks out particularly is asking stupid
questions.

You may have noticed that businesspeople have the striking ability to
talk about things very persuasively and in a superficially logical way
which sounds totally understandable while you're listening. However,
just moments later, you try to re-phrase what was just said in your
mind (and thereby attempt to understand it), but you fail at doing so.

*"Wait, what? Yeah, that's probably just my stupidity. I might have
missed something. Everyone else seems to understand it. Yeah, I'll
probably pretend to have understood it and rely on the others to
explain it later."*

Personally, I wasn't aware of this for quite some time. In University
lectures, this was my typical thought process. I always assumed my
preparation was not good enough (and truth be told, it often was
non-existent). But even if it had been good, I wouldn't have had the
guts to be the guy who asks a stupid question in an auditorium with
400 people.

## Consultants

Fast forward to working as a software engineer. Being a doctor, I
started becoming involved in some project management as we were
developing medical software.

I started becoming aware of asking stupid questions when we had our
first consultants come in.

Consultants charge *interesting* fees by the hour. Sitting in meetings
with them, I would think to myself "If I haven't understood everything
these people are talking about by the time they leave, this is a huge
waste of money". And often, I noticed that I wasn't understanding much
of what they said.

Cautiously (and slightly nervously), I started asking questions:

* "I didn't quite understand that, sorry, this may be my
  stupidity. Could you explain that again, please?"

* "Okay, I got that first part but somehow I'm missing something
  regarding the rest. Could you explain that again, please?"

This yielded three unexpected surprises which I only became aware of
as they would happen regularly over the course of the next few weeks:

* At the moment of my question, nobody else in the room had understood
  what the person was talking about.

* All other attending people were immensely grateful that I was taking
  the burden of asking the "stupid" questions.

* The people answering the questions were very kind (yeah right, they
  also earn lots of money for answering my stupid questions).

Keeping that in mind, I got more courageous:

* "Sorry, I may be missing some of the required background here. Could
  you explain this in more simple terms so that even I can understand
  it?"

* "Okay, so I think I didn't quite grasp that concept yet. Could you
  give me an example based on what you just described?"

To my repeated surprise, I never encountered any negative reaction to
my questions.

## A Theory of Question Askworthiness Thresholds

Here's my theory: In school and University (and um, in life), people
have vastly different thresholds as to what qualifies as a valid
question. A valid question in this sense is non-stupid,
non-embarassing and legitimately askworthy. Let's call it the Question
Askworthiness Threshold (QAT).

Historically, my QAT was immensely high. A question would pop into my
head, but was it askworthy? I would ponder. Is this a stupid question?
Will it embarass me in front of the others? Will the teacher /
lecturerer / CEO get angry? Will s/he actually start doubting my
competence and preparation? Never mind, maybe I can answer it by
myself if I read up on it. Maybe I'm just not well prepared enough.

The outcome would always be the same: I would ask very few questions
and those which I asked were very good ones. And I never ended up
reading up on those which I didn't have the courage to ask.

But there very often would be a person in the group who would
constantly ask insanely stupid questions - questions which everyone
else could easily answer by simply remembering what had been said a
few seconds ago. People would get annoyed. Asking stupid questions
seems to make you look like an annoying and stupid person.

This conclusion is however only partially true. The person in class
asking all the stupid questions has a very low QAT - every question
which pops into their mind is askworthy without any further
consideration. On the other side, all the other people in the class
have an immensely high QAT - they are all scared of being like the
annoying person and therefore very wary of asking any questions at
all.

What we do not have is people covering the middle ground. People who
ask questions which cover the basics without having obvious
answers. Or covering obvious answers but making sure that all
assumptions are true.

## Medical School

Having studied medicine and now reflecting on my experience as a
student and intern in hospitals, asking these questions in this field
is very difficult.

When doing a ward round with the attending doctor, asking a question
along the lines of:

* "I have absolutely no clue regarding this patient's disease and
  treatment, what is it and what should I do?"

Would yield a high probability of being shouted at while casting
doubts on your experience, education and life.

Likewise as a doctor. As a doctor you learn to professionally
circumnavigate all situations in which you could come off as not
perfectly knowledgable. Note how doctors do a good job at explaining
stuff and it sounds totally reasonable and then you arrive at home and
start asking yourself "So how does disease x actually work? What does
this medication precisely do?" (answer: nobody knows, it's medicine!).

Likewise as a student. While doing bed-side teaching, doctors like to
ask the students some questions which must be answered correctly, else
there's embarassment because the students didn't prepare well enough.

How paradoxical! The whole point of doing human teaching in a
university is to ask for what students **dont** know so you can teach
them!

## 6 Months in

Nowadays, I'm much more confident in asking "stupid"
questions. Further, I have condensed them to the bare minimum:

* "I don't get it. Please explain."

* "Why?"

* "How?"

So far, the only thing which can actually go wrong is that the person
becomes offended because s/he feels you are questioning their
competence. However, this is absolutely besides the point and by no
means to be taken as a personal offense!

Having a mutual, perfect understanding of the topic at hand is the
prerequisite for having the most effective discussion and finding the
best answers.

## What now?

We seem to be living in a society which conditions us not to ask the
stupid questions which are often the most important. As with all
habits, changing this is hard.

On the individual level, you have to change your own thoughts and
actions - lower your QAT. Further, you have to change your emotional
reaction towards people who ask you "stupid" questions. It's no
personal offense!

On the group level, we have to be receptive towards people questioning
seemingly basic things. Asking stupid questions must be encouraged.
