---
layout: post
title: Businesspeople Are Useless
date: 2019-10-01 12:00:00
disqus: y
---

Interacting with businesspeople never ceases to amaze me. They presume
that they're qualified to run companies. Why? Because they are
businesspeople.

What makes a good businessperson, anyway?

There seems to be a factory-like process of creating "great"
businesspeople: Take some random people with above-average
self-confidence. Toss them into business school, teach them how to
write up business cases, let them join McKinsey for a few months. And
out come great businesspeople. Very linear and predictable. Those
businesspeople are going to be our future startup founders and
CEOs. Great.

But - let's put that aside for a moment - imagine you have a plumbing
problem. It's serious. One of the faucets in your bathroom is
leaking. You need someone to fix it soon. To get the job done. There
are two candidates to choose from.

The first candidate has gathered ten years of practical plumbing
experience. He's fixed a wide range of problems, including the one
you're currently having.

The second candidate has spent five years in Ivy-League Plumbing
University. There he learned everything about the intricacies of flow
mechanics in water pipes. He graduated with a Master's Degree in
International Plumbing Stategy (IPS). After that, he spent a year at
plumbing McKinsey where he advised enterprise bathroom owners with
broken faucets on how to fix them. He never actually fixed one
himself.

Who do you choose?

Obvious. Common sense. We go for the guy who clearly knows his
plumbing and gets the job done. But why do we choose so differently
when it comes to businesspeople?

I recently attended [ClojuTRE 2019][clojutre-2019] where Dave Snowden
mentioned [in his talk][dave-snowden-talk-youtube] that (paraphrased)
the qualification to become CEO used to be an apprenticeship inside
the company, not some degree you get outside.

This is mildly concerning. It means that nowadays we're hiring
unqualified businesspeople - at scale.

## The Training <> Job Conflation

But - this is not a rant about businesspeople. This is so much
more. Not all businesspeople are incapable. I know some good ones. So
there must be a larger underlying problem. What is it?

It's about people who conflate their formal training with their job.

We shouldn't care about formal training. We should care about whether
someone gets the job done. And to get the job done, people rely on
skills they have acquired in the past. Sometimes you get those skills
through formal training. More often, you don't. In the real world, you
either teach yourself or work closely with someone who teaches you.

And these are two vastly different mindsets - it's either *I studied
business and that entitles me to run this company* or *I'll work on
this problem for which some of the skills I acquired in the past may
be useful*.

The first person feels entitled to run the business because of her
formal training.

The second person puts the problem first. There's a problem to solve
and some skills she's acquired may come in helpful for that. This
mindset is hugely beneficial - she admits she may be lacking some
skills. There's implies a willingness to learn - forever. Those are
the businesspeople you want to have. Those people who constantly feel
they're behind the curve and are forever learning and improving.

## Domain-specific Knowledge

And this is where domain-specific knowledge comes in. We need
knowledge which stretches across disciplines. And we need it from the
start. Like, when identifying business problems to solve: Put a bunch
of businesspeople into a room with the task to come up with startup
ideas (commonly called an *Incubator*) and I guarantee you that
nothing useful will come out of it.

Make one of those businesspeople work for a year as a plumber and I
guarantee you that she'll come back with more than one great business
idea including customers and working prototypes.

And this is the secret golden chamber where great business ideas are
hidden. But hey can only be unlocked if someone ventures out of their
formal training, acquires other skills and comes back with new
ideas. Those are the problems you want to solve - low-hanging fruit,
easy on a technical level but with high impact.

But, flipping this around, if we stay confined to what our formal
training tells us to do, we don't come up with great things. We'd
found yet another Database / AI / Blockchain / Uber for Dog Walking
company.

Business skills are a utility and any utility is useless unless it's
applied to real problems. And it's our responsibility to go out and
find them.


<!-- Links -->

[clojutre-2019]: https://clojutre.org/2019/
[dave-snowden-talk-youtube]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xYqWREPb3Lc
